Alright, now our speaker is ready.
Please give a round of applause to our speaker,
Chakrit Likitkhajorn
senior software engineer from Omise
Hello everyone
My topic is about applying SOLID principle in JavaScript
without class and object
You can call me Chris, this is my nickname
I try to wrap this up in 25 minutes
So let's get to it
Let's talk a little bit about my background
because it's related to how I view software architecture
I was a vice president of engineering at Taskworld
At that time I take care of the whole product team
and responsible for making sure that the whole product
can be sellable and awesome
I lead both engineering and design and the product team
Now I'm working as a senior software engineer at Omise Payment
I have written production code in eight different
programming languages
The way that I have a chance to work with many different
departments affects how I view software architecture
and how I write code a lot
You will see what it means in my presentation
So what is actually SOLID?
I will try to make this short
SOLID is five design principles introduced by Uncle Bob,
which is Robert C. Martin
and is very well known throughout the industry
The motivation of why I deliver this talk here is that
a lot of programmers have read about the SOLID design patterns
but it's usually being demonstrated using programming language
with class and objects
But JavaScript we are multi-paradigm
We can use class or don't use class
We can write in object-oriented or functional programming
We can write basically however we want
Let's explore the alternative way of implementing
SOLID principle but not using class and objects at all
By doing that you will see the core content
of what SOLID principle actually means
Let's first talk about single responsibility principle
It basically says that every module, every class,
or every function should have just a single responsibility
This is a very hard principle to absorb and to consume
because it's hard to define what single responsibility means
Let's take a look at an example
Let's say that we have a requirement where we need to create
a HTTP endpoint to register a new user
The passwords minimum should be four characters
so user cannot create an account with very short password
Here's the simplest way to write using Express
We have a username password
We check for the length and return 422 and password is too weak
If it's not then we register the user
then we return success response
If we write code like this then what happens is
there are times where people from different departments
will come to you and ask what the current password policy is
and should we strengthen it from security team
And there's a business team that can come to ask
if we should gather more information before register any user
Then let's ask for company name, country, etc
Whenever you talk to another department,
you talk to security team and you see that
in one function you have bunch of related code
and unrelated code cluttering together
It's hard now if you come to the meeting with these teams
It's hard to tell exactly what happened in the meeting room
by looking at the code
Now there are two completely separate reasons to change:
One is we have a new password policy from security team
or we need all information on register from business team
So let's separate it out to two sub components
whether it's class or function
And surprisingly, what I have ended up with when I try
to apply this principle is I come to realize that
the reason to change is source of change,
or put it simply, is about the people that you
communicate with.
And now if you separate to two class or two function,
then you are to talk with the business team,
and then you say that okay when I talk to this guy,
then I need to look at the user registration class.
And when I talk to security team,
I just open the code and identify in a password class,
and now you have the whole context of each team
inside your single coding file.
And surprisingly, I found that when I come to that
realization and do this presentation,
I ended up seeing that Uncle Bob,
the originator of SOLID principle,
also come to the same conclusion that I found.
He says that the purpose of single responsibility
is having different C-level executive responsible
for different things,
which is interesting and I'm happy that I come to
the same conclusion as him.
Okay, so let's see how we can implement this.
For this principle, I will compare how we can do it
with class and without class,
and you can see the different approaches.
So with class, then you create a user validation class
that's responsible for the input,
and you open this class whenever you talk to
frontend team and frontend team asks about what kind
of input we are receiving.
And you have another class which is a password class,
and you open this class whenever you talk to
security team and they ask about how we store
the password and how strong our password is.
And you have another class called the user data class
which is responsible for saving data to the database,
and you can open this class whenever you talk with
the database administration teams,
and you can see the whole context of how we use
the database system.
And you have the whole flow being composed in
the controller which is one object responsible for
composing the whole flow.
Okay, let's see how we can do this without class.
It's very simple - you have a bunch of functions
but the same concept.
So you have three functions and each function is
the one that you look at when you talk to each team.
Now you have password, validate registration,
and save user, so it's the same concept,
just instead of using class you separate it
using functions.
And to compose it you can use the pattern called
higher order function which takes a bunch of functions
and creates another function.
And you can see that it validates using the validator,
and after validation passes, execute business logic
using the controller which is another function
and it returns to OO.
And then you just use this composed function called
create handler and you put it into express.
It's basically the same separation,
just a different style of doing things.
And what I found about not using class is
it encourages incremental development.
And what I mean by encourage is that let's say
you have a small app,
you put everything inside just one big function.
And now you're becoming larger,
you want to separate the concerns to different concerns,
and you can just move these two lines here,
you can just move this one line here,
and then you can just write the higher order function
and replace it with this higher order function.
You can basically just move code around and separate
the concerns just like that.
Unlike the object oriented approach where you need to
create class, create a bunch of constructors,
and after doing that then you can move code,
which is more tedious.
So when you're not using class,
I found that it feels more fluid.
The code becomes fluid - you can change however you want
to compose things.
It's not as rigid as the object oriented approach.
So at first I really like this approach,
I try to implement it into my team.
What really happen when you implement this into the team?
This is what I found when we use the object-oriented
approach:
Since it's harder to change the structure,
it incentivize the team to use the same structure.
And as a result, it's easier to standardize
the practice for the whole team.
Even if it's hard to structure it in a different way,
but it encourage the standardization.
At the opposite, function composition encourage you
to have a different type of composition.
You can compose it in a way that is actually very fit
to the domain business domain that you are solving.
But in the other hand, it encourage people to do
bunch of different things in the codebase
and you lose the standardization.
So that is a trade-off that I found when I try
to implement this into the team.
By knowing this trade-off, then you can see that
when I try to use function composition,
I need to make sure that people still conform
to some standardization.
And when I use object-oriented approach,
then I need to make sure that people don't conform
to the standard practice
and try to come up with maybe better way to compose
and make sense of the code.
Let's jump to the next principle: open-close principle.
Open-close principle say that the software should be
open for extension but close for modification.
Let's jump to the example now.
Let's say that you start with the user can confirm
the invoice and you have a function called
ðšŒðš˜ðš—ðšðš’ðš›ðš–ð™¸ðš—ðšŸðš˜ðš’ðšŒðšŽ, you save it.
And now after invoice is confirmed,
you need to send the email to customer
and you implement it here.
And after this, you say that after invoice confirmed,
you need to send push notification.
So you just send the push notification.
And what happen is when user complain about
not getting the email, then it's in just these two lines.
And when the user complain about not getting
the push notification,
then it's another lines inside the single function.
So generally speaking, you have one function
that's responsible for many issues.
And when each team working in parallel,
it introduce a lot of merge conflict.
And we really like to solve the merge conflict, right?
Function will grow bigger and bigger.
When you try to modify the current behavior of function,
it's possible that some people rely on the function
to act in a certain way.
And when you modify it,
it can introduce breaking change that you don't know
because the guys that depend on the behavior
is someone in the team that very far from you.
You ended up in the situation like this again
that you have bunch of related code when you talk
and work with some requirement
and bunch of unrelated code when it's clutter together.
So how to solve it?
Then you can use observable, event, or stream.
So you can say that for the confirm invoice,
you just say that after save,
then after saving it, I put it into invoice stream.
And then you have ðšœðšŽðš—ðšð™¸ðš—ðšŸðš˜ðš’ðšŒðšŽð™´ðš–ðšŠðš’ðš•
and you have ðšœðšŽðš—ðšð™¿ðšžðšœðš‘ð™½ðš˜ðšðš’ðšðš’ðšŒðšŠðšðš’ðš˜ðš—
and you push this function inside the stream,
listen from it to listen for the event.
And now the confirm invoice will be maintain
and look the same always.
So you never modify the behavior of confirm invoice,
but you just make it extendable and you extend it.
And that's the open-close principle.
The benefit of using stream is that you can scale
to become like you have email sender as another process.
You put the stream into Kafka or RabbitMQ
or whatever queue system that you have.
And you can scale the system that way,
but you can start small just using Rx
or observable stream.
Let's talk about Liskov substitution principle.
It basically say that the derived class
must be substitutable for the base classes.
It's hard to absorb just this sentence,
so let's take a look at the example now.
Let's say that we have the ðš›ðšŽðš™ðš˜ðš›ðšð™´ðš›ðš›ðš˜ðš›
for the production and ðš›ðšŽðš™ðš˜ðš›ðšð™´ðš›ðš›ðš˜ðš›
for the local machine doing different things.
In production, you need to send the error to Sentry.
You have some plugins that actually insert
custom metadata to the error.
And so the ðš›ðšŽðš™ðš˜ðš›ðšð™´ðš›ðš›ðš˜ðš› to the production
will just also report that metadata.
But for the report when you work in your local machine,
you don't want to send every error to Sentry.
So you just do the ðšŒðš˜ðš—ðšœðš˜ðš•ðšŽ.ðšŽðš›ðš›ðš˜ðš›.
But what happened here is that the ðš›ðšŽðš™ðš˜ðš›ðšð™´ðš›ðš›ðš˜ðš›
in production can explode when custom metadata
is undefined.
Which means that ðš›ðšŽðš™ðš˜ðš›ðšð™´ðš›ðš›ðš˜ðš› in production
cannot substitute the ðš›ðšŽðš™ðš˜ðš›ðšð™´ðš›ðš›ðš˜ðš› locally.
It cannot totally substitute it.
And what happened is the user of the report error
need to know and need to handle some little secret
that if it's in production but for some reason
we doing things wrong we don't have custom metadata
then we need to insert it because one of the report
error implementation just cannot handle when
the custom metadata is undefined.
So that's kind of break the Liskov substitution
principle.
And please don't do it this way because the problem
of doing this way is the implementer of do something
need to know a little secret about the report error
which might be the guy that do the report error
function and the guy that do the do something
function might be in a different team
so we don't want the knowledge to be clutter
all around.
And what you should do here is to make it totally
substitutable so you should just handle
the custom metadata error here and make sure that
report error in production can be total substitute
to the report error locally.
So basically what it means is function should be
replaceable.
This example is not so common because we don't use
this pattern a lot but it's more common when you
have bunch of React components that you need to
render based on if they are admin then render this
component if user is just a user then render
another component and you need to make sure that
in every cases possible this admin page and this
user page should be substitutable and there's
nothing that it can everything that work with user
page should work with admin page and everything
that work on admin page should work in user page too.
Okay so let's talk about interface segregation
principle.
It says that the client should not be forced on or
depend on method that they may not use.
Okay so let's take a look of how the example now.
So let's say that you start with the delete invoice
you don't want to actually delete it so you just
set is delete to be true.
And now after that then you need to implement
the recover the deleted data so you implement it
recover invoice and now you see that the code is
duplicate so you just say that okay let's remove
the duplication and make it like this and let's
update the status and now duplication is being
removed.
And then it's come now you don't conform to
the GDPR because GDPR say that data can be removed
and user can be forgotten now you need to do
a hard delete.
And if you still try to conform to this you might
ended up that okay let's put another parameter here
which is a hard delete and if it's hard delete
then you just remove the whole things and if not
then you just change the boolean here change
the is delete here.
And when you implement it like this it become
for the delete implementer this parameter hard
delete make total sense for him but for the recover
implementer it's okay why I need this hard delete
parameter it's not make sense for me at all
it's such a nonsense.
And now if on recover we need to implement something
such as if one month pass we need to reassign
the invoice number then now you need to have
the recover logic inside this change delete status
function.
And you ended up in this again that when you want
to know how we recover things you need to look
a bunch of related code and when you want to know
how we delete invoice there's also related code
and unrelated code clutter all together again.
And the solution is simply in this case is simply
re-duplicate the code and just make separate case
for delete invoice and recover invoice.
The more and the takeaway here for this principle is
function parameter should make sense for the majority
of customers.
Otherwise, let's consider having separate function.
And I saw that this principle is violated because
as I show in my example earlier, when you try to
reduce the duplication, but then new requirement come
and you try to conform to the current structure
and don't look back and see that, okay,
is it still make sense to do it this way?
Should we reduplicate the code?
Then you are likely to violate this principle.
So I would say that code duplication should not be
viewed as a dogma and sometimes it's better to have
some duplication, but have a very separate domain
where we can look at and see that, okay,
delete and recover, we do totally different things
here and it makes sense.
Okay.
So the last principle, Dependency Inversion Principle.
So it basically says that the high level module
should not depend on low level modules.
And the example here is that you have case where
you need to upload user avatar, which is a high
level requirement.
And you need to use S3, Amazon S3, as object storage,
which is infrastructure level requirement.
And okay.
So you can start simple, right?
And you have a class user, you implement the
upload avatar.
And in this principle, I will compare how you do it
in class and do it without class.
And with class, then you just have S3 and upload file
and without class, then you just do the same things.
But now the next requirement come and you need to be
able to store in the Google Cloud Storage as well.
And the naive implementation is you just have if like
if the config is S3, then we use S3 and if not,
then we just use Google Cloud.
And it's the same for class and function.
The problem about this naive implementation is now
the upload function implementer need to know about
the deep infrastructure, whether we use S3 and
Google Cloud Storage.
So it's kind of things that now you have to know
more things in order to contribute to the project.
And that's not good.
And we can solve this by using technique called
dependency injection.
So you have class for S3 storage.
In the class world, you have class called S3 storage,
Google Cloud Storage, and you inject here.
And in the function world, it's totally the same
concept, but instead of injecting class,
you inject the functions instead.
So you inject the upload S3 function and inject
the upload Google Cloud function.
And the benefit of this is when people come to ask
you how upload works and can we change it,
then you can just look at the whole flow without
noticing that inside the upload function,
it's actually we have two storage.
And it's easy to explain to the business who don't
know much about our internal infrastructure
that this is how the whole flow work.
Just looking at the code, you can totally explain
without need to write a complicated documentation.
You can just go to meeting, open the laptop,
look at the code, and explain it in the meeting
room immediately.
And if they ask, okay, how can I change it?
I can answer immediately in the meeting room.
And this is why we all love polymorphism.
And I think this is a very important thing
that polymorphism gives us.
It allows us to express the different flow from
different perspectives.
You can express the flow of the high level flow
and completely set aside the low level detail.
And now you can communicate and write a class or
function that can be used when you communicate
with any type of stakeholders, which is for me,
as I work with multiple stakeholders since the start,
then I find this style of coding really useful.
But that's a trade off because when you use class
and object, then you can only inject the whole
objects and object can have so many methods.
And you can end up that you just want just one
method, but you need to inject the whole things,
the whole objects that have 10 different methods
into the class that you want.
So let's consider if you use this approach,
then please consider if the object become too big
and break it down to different function.
In the function, it's opposite because you can
inject just one function at a time.
So in the past, I ended up that have one function
that need to inject like seven or eight functions
in order to make it work.
And it's become really hard to keep track of where
these seven and eight functions coming from.
So in the opposite way, when you use function inject
function as dependencies, then you might consider
grouping the function in the way that make sense
in the business domain context.
And that's it.
I just went through five principles.
But my takeaway here is that I kind of intentionally
structure the talk in the way that, okay,
if I write code in this way, then what happened?
And if I write code in another way,
then what happened?
And after that, I talk about which way is more
desirable and why.
And for me, the desirable as a coder who need to
talk to a lot of stakeholders, I want to be able to
just look at the code and talk everything in the
meeting room.
I don't want to have to write a lot of complex
document and write a lot of presentation,
a lot of diagram.
I just want to look at the code and can communicate
with every type of stakeholders in the meeting.
And this is desirable for me.
And I never use the word "violate" or "wrong" because
I want to say that I don't think that's about
the architecture is about what is right or wrong.
I don't like it when people say that, okay,
this programmer violates some kind of principle.
So you are very bad and you should feel bad
about yourself.
I think it's not a healthy way to look at
software architecture.
So that's why I intentionally structure my
presentation this way.
And at the end, I believe the architecture is about
managing knowledge and communication channel within
the team or within the team to the outside
stakeholders.
It's all about how you manage and how you intend to
communicate within team and to the outside of
the team.
And that's all my talk.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chakrit.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chakrit, from Omise Thailand na ka.